add vignette with theoretical background (#134)
epiverse-trace/bpmodels: vignettes/theoretical_background.Rmd

---

> title: "Theoretical background"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "An overview of the theoretical underpinnings for bpmodels"
```

& + (S-1) \log \frac{R_0}{k} - (SR_0 + (S - 1)) \log \left(1 + \frac{R_0}{k}\right)
\end{align}

The log-likelihood for Poisson distributed offspring follows from this where $k$ tends to infinity (corresponding to Eq. 2.2 in @farrington2003)

$$
\mathrm{LL}(S) = (S - 1) \log R_0 - S R_0 + (S - 2) \log S - \log\Gamma(S)
$$

In all cases the point estimate for the basic reproduction number $\hat{R_0}$ is related to the mean chain size $\bar{S}$ by

$$
\hat{R_0} = 1 - \frac{1}{\bar{S}}
$$

#### Length distributions

The cumulative mass function $F(L)$ of observing a chain of length $L$ when offspring is Poisson distributed is given by Eq. (2.5) in @farrington2003 (there called "outbreak duration"):

$$
F(L) = e^{-R_0} E_L \left( e^{R_0 e^{-R_0} } \right)
$$

where $E_L(x)$ is the iterated exponential function, $E_0(x) = 1$, $E_{L + 1}(x) = x^{E_L(x)}$.

For geometric distributed offspring (corresponding to a negative Binomial with $k=1$) this function is given by

$$
F(L) = \frac{ 1- R_0^{L + 1} } {1 - R_0^{L - 2}}
$$

In both cases $f(L)$ denotes cumulative mass functions and therefore the probability of observing a chain of length $L$ is therefore $f(L) - f(L - 1)$.

> ## Gamma-Borel mixture

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Gamma-Borel mixture
```

The probability distribution of outbreak sizes from a branching process with a Poisson offspring distribution (Eq. 2.2 in @farrington2003) is a special case of the [Borel-Tanner distribution](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Borel_distribution#Borel%E2%80%93Tanner_distribution) starting with 1 individual.
An alternative to the negative binomial offspring distribution which represents a Poisson-gamma mixture is a Borel-gamma mixture.
This could represent situations where the variation is not at the _individual level_ but at the _chain level_, i.e. transmission chains is homogeneous but there is heterogeneity between chains.
In that case, it can be shown that the resulting log-likelihood of chain sizes is

\begin{align}
\mathrm{LL}(S) = &\log\Gamma(k + S - 1) - \left(\log\Gamma(k) + \log\Gamma(S + 1) \right) \\
& + (S-1) \log S - k \log \left(S + \frac{R_0}{k}\right)
\end{align}

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

The analytic likelihoods stated above are included in the package and used when the corresponding offspring distributions are given.

```

> ## Size and length distributions for arbitrary offspring distributions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Numerical approximations of chain size and length distributions
```

> The analytic likelihoods stated above are included in the package and used when the corresponding offspring distributions are given.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

Author: Have reworded instead of moving.
